# Frontend Course / Build Tools / Bundlers

[:arrow_backward: Frontend Course / Build Tools](./README.md)

---

Popular bundlers (in alphabetical order):
- Brunch
- Parcel
- Rollup
- [Webpack](#webpack)

## Webpack

The webpack official website can be found [here](https://webpack.js.org/).

Webpack is a static module bundler. When webpack processes your application, it internally builds a dependency graph which maps every module your project needs and generates one or more bundles. The dependency graph is built by following `require` / `import` and `module.exports` / `export` statements used in modules.

Since version 4.0.0. webpack does not require a configuration file as it comes packaged with a sensible default configuration. However, webpack supports the use of a configuration script - commonly named `webpack.config.js` - which specifies the files that are entering the bundling process and the output that we want to build.

Webpack is highly configurable through use of loaders and plugins. For more information follow the [official documentation](https://webpack.js.org/concepts/).

Webpack can be installed from NPM. For more information follow the [official installation instructions](https://webpack.js.org/guides/installation/).

To get started with webpack, install it as a development dependency of your project:

```
npm install --save-dev webpack webpack-cli
```

Create a `webpack.config.js` file in your project root. This will configure webpack to bundle specific files and to output the result to a specific directory.

The `webpack.config.js` file is read and executed by Node. We can use the Node API, as well as CommonJS and ES6 (for Node 14 and onward) module syntax (`require`, `module.exports`, `import`, `export`) inside our webpack configuration file.

At its most basic, the `webpack.config.js` defines one entry point and one output point for the bundle process.

```js
// webpack.config.js
// Require the Node `path` API to resolve relative paths to folders.
const path = require('path');

// The webpack configuration is usually an object, but other types exist too.
module.exports = {
    // Begin bundling from `main.js`, relative to the config file directory.
    entry: path.resolve(__dirname, 'main.js'),
    output: {
        // Save the bundle to a `bundle.js` file.
        filename: 'bundle.js',
        // Save the file to the `build` directory, relative to the config file.
        path: path.resolve(__dirname, 'build'),
    },
}
```

To run webpack and begin the bundling process, add a `build` script to your project's `package.json`.

```jsonc
// package.json
{
    // ...
    "scripts": {
        // Run webpack using the webpack.config.js configuration.
        "build": "webpack --config webpack.config.js"
    },
    // ...
}
```

You can now build your application with webpack using the `build` script.

```
npm run build
```

> :point_up: **Note!**
>
>  Webpack is primarily used to bundle JavaScript modules and assets they depend on. While there are cases where it can also be used to bundle SCSS and similar assets, this is not webpack's primary function and you may find other tools to be better suited for the job.
