# Frontend Course / Essential Git / Local and Remote Git Repositories

[:arrow_backward: Frontend Course / Essential Git](./README.md)

---

## Local and Remote Git Repositories

Git is a distributed version control system. A **distributed version control system** (DVCS) ensures that a network of client computers can work on a repository independent of each other. A DVCS provides each client with a complete copy of the repository and the tools necessary for clients to reconcile their work between them, keeping each repository copy up to date with the latest changes.

> :point_up: **Note!** We covered DVCS in the [previous lesson](./01.md).

The copy of the repository on a client's machine is the **local repository** or working copy of the repository. A copy of the repository accessible over a local network or the internet is a **remote repository**.

Remote repositories can be **self-hosted** or **managed** by an online platform that provides remote Git repositories as a service. The most popular Git repository hosting providers are [**GitHub**](https://github.com), [**GitLab**](https://gitlab.com), and [**Bitbucket**](https://bitbucket.com). Git repository hosting providers often offer additional features that are otherwise not present in Git - such as user access control and repository analytics - for free or as part of paid subscription plans.

> :pencil: **Homework!** Research how to create a GitHub repository by reading the [official documentation](https://docs.github.com/en/get-started/quickstart/create-a-repo). Create a public and a private repository. Add a file to the public and private repository using GitHub's UI. Sign out of GitHub and try visiting the public and private repository pages. What do you see?

## Cloning a remote repository into a local repository

A remote repository can be **cloned** into a local repository. To clone this course repository we can use:

```
git clone https://github.com/dstrekelj/frontend-course
```

The `git clone` command clones a repository from the provided path into a newly created folder with the same name as the repository (`frontend-course`), creating a local copy of the repository in the process. To successfully clone a remote repository, the remote repository must be a public public or private repository that the client can access.

> :pencil: **Homework!** The `git clone` command runs the `git-clone` tool in the background. Research `git-clone` by reading the [official documentation](https://git-scm.com/docs/git-clone). Answer the following questions:
>
> - How can we clone the repository into an existing folder?
> - How can we clone the repository into a folder with a specific name?

> :pencil: **Homework!** GitHub allows cloning a remote repository using a HTTPS or SSH URL. What is the difference between the two? Which would be the better choice?

## Adding a remote repository to a local repository

A local repository can be set up to track a remote repository at any time. The convention is for the remote repository to be named **origin** to indicate that it is the origin of all.

```
git remote add origin ...
```

> :pencil: **Homework!** The `git remote` command runs the `git-remote` tool in the background. Research `git-remote` by reading the [official documentation](https://git-scm.com/docs/git-remote). Answer the following questions:
>
> - How can we list all existing remotes?
> - How can we remove a remote?
> - How can we change the URL of an existing remote?

### Pushing changes to the remote repository

```
git push
```

### Pulling changes from the remote repository

```
git pull
```

### Choosing what to track in repositories

Not all files should be tracked by Git, such as files containing sensitive information and files that are a byproduct of the development process. We can tell Git which files to ignore by creating one or more `.gitignore` files in the repository. The `.gitignore` file is a plain text file containing the names or paths to ignored files and folders.

An example `.gitignore` file:

```sh
.DS_Store
node_modules
```

In this example:

- Any file or folder with the exact name `.DS_Store` is ignored
- Any file or folder with the exact name `node_modules` is ignored

> :pencil: **Homework!** `.gitignore` uses glob patterns to match against file names. Research glob patterns. Define glob patterns for ignoring the following:
>
> - `build` folder in the root of the repository
> - all files in the repository that end with the `.log` extension
> - all files in the repository that begin with `.env`, including `.env `, except for `.env.example`

Git can only ignore untracked files. Files that were previously tracked have to first be removed from the repository before being added to `.gitignore`. Git will then continue ignoring them from that point onward until the files are removed from `.gitignore`.

> :pencil: **Homework!** Set up a repository and commit a couple of files so that Git can track them. Try using `.gitignore` to ignore the files that were previously tracked. After committing the `.gitignore` file, try changing the ignored files and committing the change. Answer the following questions:
>
> - Did Git ignore the changes to ignored files?
> - Which steps must we take to make Git untrack and ignore the files in the repository?
> - Are the files still visible in the commit history after being untracked and ignored?

Git cannot track empty folders, but empty folders can be useful to outline a project's architecture ahead of time. The current convention to tracking empty folders is to create a single empty file named `.gitkeep` into the empty folder we want to track. The `.gitkeep` file can be removed later on when the folder is populated with actual project files.

> :point_up: **Note!** The name `.gitkeep` has no special meaning to Git. It's a name chosen by developers to clearly communicate the file's purpose in the project - to keep the otherwise empty folder in the Git repository.

---

[:arrow_backward: Frontend Course / Essential Git](./README.md)
